% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
\PassOptionsToPackage{dvipsnames,svgnames,x11names}{xcolor}
%
\documentclass[
]{agujournal2019}
\usepackage{xcolor}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{5}
\usepackage{iftex}
\ifPDFTeX
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math} % this also loads fontspec
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
\fi
\usepackage{lmodern}
\ifPDFTeX\else
  % xetex/luatex font selection
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\makeatletter
\@ifundefined{KOMAClassName}{% if non-KOMA class
  \IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
    \usepackage{parskip}
  }{% else
    \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
    \setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}}
}{% if KOMA class
  \KOMAoptions{parskip=half}}
\makeatother
% Make \paragraph and \subparagraph free-standing
\makeatletter
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
  \let\oldparagraph\paragraph
  \renewcommand{\paragraph}{
    \@ifstar
      \xxxParagraphStar
      \xxxParagraphNoStar
  }
  \newcommand{\xxxParagraphStar}[1]{\oldparagraph*{#1}\mbox{}}
  \newcommand{\xxxParagraphNoStar}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
  \let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
  \renewcommand{\subparagraph}{
    \@ifstar
      \xxxSubParagraphStar
      \xxxSubParagraphNoStar
  }
  \newcommand{\xxxSubParagraphStar}[1]{\oldsubparagraph*{#1}\mbox{}}
  \newcommand{\xxxSubParagraphNoStar}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\makeatother


\usepackage{longtable,booktabs,array}
\usepackage{calc} % for calculating minipage widths
% Correct order of tables after \paragraph or \subparagraph
\usepackage{etoolbox}
\makeatletter
\patchcmd\longtable{\par}{\if@noskipsec\mbox{}\fi\par}{}{}
\makeatother
% Allow footnotes in longtable head/foot
\IfFileExists{footnotehyper.sty}{\usepackage{footnotehyper}}{\usepackage{footnote}}
\makesavenoteenv{longtable}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\makeatletter
\newsavebox\pandoc@box
\newcommand*\pandocbounded[1]{% scales image to fit in text height/width
  \sbox\pandoc@box{#1}%
  \Gscale@div\@tempa{\textheight}{\dimexpr\ht\pandoc@box+\dp\pandoc@box\relax}%
  \Gscale@div\@tempb{\linewidth}{\wd\pandoc@box}%
  \ifdim\@tempb\p@<\@tempa\p@\let\@tempa\@tempb\fi% select the smaller of both
  \ifdim\@tempa\p@<\p@\scalebox{\@tempa}{\usebox\pandoc@box}%
  \else\usebox{\pandoc@box}%
  \fi%
}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother


% definitions for citeproc citations
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproctext{}{}
\NewDocumentCommand\citeproc{mm}{%
  \begingroup\def\citeproctext{#2}\cite{#1}\endgroup}
\makeatletter
 % allow citations to break across lines
 \let\@cite@ofmt\@firstofone
 % avoid brackets around text for \cite:
 \def\@biblabel#1{}
 \def\@cite#1#2{{#1\if@tempswa , #2\fi}}
\makeatother
\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newlength{\csllabelwidth}
\setlength{\csllabelwidth}{3em}
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}[2] % #1 hanging-indent, #2 entry-spacing
 {\begin{list}{}{%
  \setlength{\itemindent}{0pt}
  \setlength{\leftmargin}{0pt}
  \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}
  % turn on hanging indent if param 1 is 1
  \ifodd #1
   \setlength{\leftmargin}{\cslhangindent}
   \setlength{\itemindent}{-1\cslhangindent}
  \fi
  % set entry spacing
  \setlength{\itemsep}{#2\baselineskip}}}
 {\end{list}}
\usepackage{calc}
\newcommand{\CSLBlock}[1]{\hfill\break\parbox[t]{\linewidth}{\strut\ignorespaces#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLLeftMargin}[1]{\parbox[t]{\csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLRightInline}[1]{\parbox[t]{\linewidth - \csllabelwidth}{\strut#1\strut}}
\newcommand{\CSLIndent}[1]{\hspace{\cslhangindent}#1}



\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines

\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}



 


\usepackage{url} %this package should fix any errors with URLs in refs.
\usepackage{lineno}
\usepackage[inline]{trackchanges} %for better track changes. finalnew option will compile document with changes incorporated.
\usepackage{soul}
\linenumbers
\makeatletter
\@ifpackageloaded{caption}{}{\usepackage{caption}}
\AtBeginDocument{%
\ifdefined\contentsname
  \renewcommand*\contentsname{Table of contents}
\else
  \newcommand\contentsname{Table of contents}
\fi
\ifdefined\listfigurename
  \renewcommand*\listfigurename{List of Figures}
\else
  \newcommand\listfigurename{List of Figures}
\fi
\ifdefined\listtablename
  \renewcommand*\listtablename{List of Tables}
\else
  \newcommand\listtablename{List of Tables}
\fi
\ifdefined\figurename
  \renewcommand*\figurename{Figure}
\else
  \newcommand\figurename{Figure}
\fi
\ifdefined\tablename
  \renewcommand*\tablename{Table}
\else
  \newcommand\tablename{Table}
\fi
}
\@ifpackageloaded{float}{}{\usepackage{float}}
\floatstyle{ruled}
\@ifundefined{c@chapter}{\newfloat{codelisting}{h}{lop}}{\newfloat{codelisting}{h}{lop}[chapter]}
\floatname{codelisting}{Listing}
\newcommand*\listoflistings{\listof{codelisting}{List of Listings}}
\makeatother
\makeatletter
\makeatother
\makeatletter
\@ifpackageloaded{caption}{}{\usepackage{caption}}
\@ifpackageloaded{subcaption}{}{\usepackage{subcaption}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{bookmark}
\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\urlstyle{same}
\hypersetup{
  pdftitle={Adaptive Introgression Shapes the Pan-genome of Populus Hybrid Zones},
  pdfauthor={Baxter Worthing},
  colorlinks=true,
  linkcolor={blue},
  filecolor={Maroon},
  citecolor={Blue},
  urlcolor={Blue},
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}



\draftfalse

\begin{document}
\title{Adaptive Introgression Shapes the Pan-genome of Populus Hybrid
Zones}

\authors{Baxter Worthing\affil{1}}
\affiliation{1}{The University of Vermont, }



\begin{abstract}
Poplar trees\ldots{}
\end{abstract}





\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction}

Hybridization between distinct species can lead to the exchange of
genetic variation across species boundaries, a process known as
introgression. Introgression is a key source of genetic novelty that
shapes the evolution of natural systems (\emph{CITE}) and humans
(\emph{cite}) and contributes to the development of crop varietals
{[}Gao et al. (2019); Kou et al. (2020); Cheng et al. (2019); Sun et
al., 2020; Qiao et al.,2021; Zanini et al., 2021 {]}. Admixed
individuals, the recipients of intorgressed sequence, present novel
combinations of alleles originating from both parental species and serve
as tests of the environmental and molecular factors that limit the
adaptive exchange of genetic variation between species. Indeed, research
on natural admixed populations suggests that introgression can be an
adaptive process,through which genetic variation related to
locally-adaptive phenotypes is passed from one species to the other
{[}Suarez-Gonzalez et al. (2018); Leroy et al. (2020); Rendón-Anaya et
al. (2021); Hamilton \& Miller (2016); savolainen2007gene;
kremer2020oaks{]} (\emph{CITE MORE THAN JUST TREES}). Closer and more
extensive analysis of natural mainfestations of adaptive introgression
can reveal the types of genetic variation that are able to adaptively
cross species boundaries, the regions of the genome that are receptive
to the introduction of foreign sequence and the degree to which
environmental context influences the adaptive nature pf introgression.
Such research is valuable not only becasue it sheds lights on important
questions in evolutionary biology, such as the evolution of species
boundaries and molecular basiss of adaptive traits, but also because it
gauges the overall potential for the introduction of foreign genetic
variation into a novel genetic background, which is a key area of
exploration in the field of biotechnology.

The size and molecular origin of the genetic variation that is exchanged
between species through adaptive introgression is important to define,
as a growing body of research suggests that genomic structural variation
(SV), here defined as genetic variation larger than 50bp resulting for
insertion, deletion, translocation or inversion of genomic sequence is
often the causal variation underlying ecologically and economically
important traits in many taxa. For instance, SV may play a role in local
adaptation to climate, and past research shows divergence between
populations for SV genotypes resulting from both local adaptation and
neutral population structure (Hämälä et al., 2021; Y. Li et al., 2024;
Z. Li et al., 2023; Songsomboon et al., 2021). At a broader scale,
research also shows that SV maintain genetic differentiation between
species ((L. Zhang et al., 2021). However, less is known about the
adaptive exchange of SV genotypes between divergent populations and
species. Introgression between crop varietals and wild relatives has
been a key factor in the breeding history of many crops, and recent work
shows that SV are often the casual variants involved in this process
{[}Gao et al. (2019); Kou et al. (2020); Cheng et al. (2019); Sun et
al., 2020; Qiao et al.,2021; Zanini et al., 2021 {]}. Introgression is
also common in natrual systmes and recent work highlights introgression
as an important source of adaptive genetic novelty in many species,
particularly forest trees (Hamilton \& Miller, 2016; Leroy et al., 2020;
Rendón-Anaya et al., 2021; Suarez-Gonzalez et al., 2018). However, past
work on the genetics of such adaptive introgression in natural systems
focused primarily on SNP genotypes. While hybrid genomes may be porous
to variation at the singl -nucleotide scale, and introgressed SNP
alleles may even present an adaptive advantage in admixed individuals,
it remains unclear if the same true for SV genotypes, which have greater
potential for delterious phenotypic effects. Recently, research has
highlighted a potential role for SV in adaptive intorgression. This work
suggests that SV may play an important role in both adaptive
introgression (Almarri et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2023; X. Zhang et al.,
2021) and in the maintenance of species boundaries (L. Zhang et al.,
2021). If SV is indeed involved in adaptive introgression, it is worth
investigating the molecular nature (eg size, frequency, variant class,
genomic location) of the SV alleles involved, as well as the consistency
and directionality of intrgression involving SV. Admixed individuals may
present mosaics of SV alleles derived from both parental sepecies, or
introgression may be directionally biased. Similarly, natural hybrid
zones may be hotspots for the generation of novel SV alleles through
processes such as unequal crossing over. Here, we leverage extensive
sampling of natural forest tree hybrid zones, cutting edge techniques
for genotyping SV in admixed individuals and established landscape
genomics analyses to investigate these areas of uncertainty.

****CHOP*** Hybridization between distinct species can lead to the
exchange of genetic variation across species boundaries, a process known
as introgression. Introgression is common among inter-fertile species of
forest trees, and in many cases, is hypothesized to be an adaptive
process, through which genetic variation related to locally-adaptive
phenotypes is passed from one species to the other (Hamilton \& Miller,
2016; Leroy et al., 2020; Rendón-Anaya et al., 2021; Suarez-Gonzalez et
al., 2018) Support for this hypothesis requires a clearer understanding
of the nature of genetic variation that is exchanged between species,
and the degree to which this variation is involved in adaptive processes
in natural populations. Characterization of the genetic variation
involved in adaptive introgression would shed light on the evolutionary
forces that influence the content of admixed genomes and help reveal the
loci that underlie both the adaptive traits and genetic
incompatibilities that shape species boundaries.

****CHOP*** The majority of past research on adaptive introgression has
focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and small indels, but
structural variation (SV) is also likely to play a role in adaptive
introgression. SV, which includes deletions, duplications, inversions,
and translocations of DNA segments, can have a significant impact on
gene expression, gene function, and ultimately, adaptive phenotypic
variation. For this reason, SV is known to be a major source of genetic
variation in many species, and has been implicated in the evolution of
adaptive traits in a variety of taxa (Hämälä et al., 2021; Y. Li et al.,
2024; Z. Li et al., 2023; Songsomboon et al., 2021). As the notion that
SV is involved in adaptive evolution gains support, it is only logical
to ask is how SV is involved in adaptive introgression. Recent research
suggests that SV may play an important role in both adaptive
introgression (Almarri et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2023; X. Zhang et al.,
2021) and in the maintenance of species boundaries (L. Zhang et al.,
2021) in natural systems. Introgression between crop varietals and wild
relatives has been a key factor in the breeding history of many crops,
and recent work shows that SV are often the casual variants involved in
this process {[}Gao et al. (2019); Kou et al. (2020); Cheng et al.
(2019); Sun et al., 2020; Qiao et al., 2021; Zanini et al., 2021 {]}.
While the significant effect of introgressed SV on economically
important crop traits is well recognized, far less in known about the
relationship between introgression, SV and ecologically important traits
in natural hybrid zones.

The study of SV in natural hybrid zones is challenging, as it requires
the ability to accurately genotype SV in a large number of admixed
individuals. The majority of past research on SV in natural hybrid zones
has relied on the use of reference genomes derived from a single
individual from only one of the parental species, which can lead to
reference bias {[}Bock et al. (2023); song2023plant;
feng2024integrating{]}. Reference bias occurs when the genomes of re
sequenced individuals contain regions that are highly diverged from the
reference genome sequence, causing reads originating from these regions
to align incorrectly, or not align at all. This can lead to
misinterpretation or under-representation of variation resulting from
admixture (Secomandi et al., 2025). Reference bias is particularly
problematic when studying SV, as large insertions and deletions may be
longer than sequencing reads, making variation in their presence and
absence (PAV) challenging to detect. Furthermore, SV is often
species-specific and, because admixed individuals represent a mixture of
genetic variation from two or more species, the presence of reference
bias can obscure the effect that the presence (or absence) of genetic
variation has on traits, and can hinder the identification of SV that is
involved in introgression.

Recently, an increasing number of studies have relied on pan-genome
assembly to overcome reference bias and to accurately genotype SV (Gao
et al., 2019; Kang et al., 2023; Y. Li et al., 2024; Z. Li et al., 2023;
Liang et al., 2025; Secomandi et al., 2025; Songsomboon et al., 2021). A
pan-genome assembly is a non-redundant collection of sequences
originating from multiple individuals. This genetic information can be
represented as ``nodes'' in a pan-genome graph, while the linear
sequence of each input genome is stored as a ``path'' connecting a
series of nodes. In a pan-genome graph, each node describes the
alignment between at least two sequences, given an expected level of
sequence divergence (Kang et al., 2023). Pan-genome graphs can capture
complex variation that is not present in a single reference genome, and
can provide a more accurate representation of the genetic variation
present in admixed individuals. Pan-genome assembly has been used to
identify and genotype SV related to ecologically and economically
important traits in a variety of taxa, and has been shown to be an
effective tool for studying adaptive evolution in natural populations
(Fang \& Edwards, 2024; Kang et al., 2023; Secomandi et al., 2025).
Pan-genome assembly could help overcome the challenges of studying SV in
admixed tree populations, and could provide new insights into the role
of SV in adaptive introgression in natural populations of forest trees
{[}secomandi2025pangenome{]}. Despite this potentail, we know of only
one study that used pan-genome assembly to examine introgression in the
context of forest tree hybrid zones. Liang et al.~(2025) use a
pan-genome based approach to genotype SV in a range-wide sampling of the
interfertile oak species \emph{Quercus variabilis} and \emph{Q.
acutissima}, showing that SV show signals of adaptive intorgression that
differs from that detected from SNP data and identifying adaptive
intorgression of SV genotyps in a gene rich region of oak chromosome 9
(Liang et al., 2025). Here, we add to this naicent line of research by
exploring the relationship between structural variation and
introgression between \emph{Populus balsamifera} and \emph{Populus
trichocarpa}, two forest tree species that diverged much more recently
than the oak species studied by Liang et al.~(2025). We leverage a
larger sample size and finer geographic scale to study the role of SV in
local adaptation and adaptive introgression across repeated hybrid
zones.

\emph{Populus balsamifera} and \emph{Populus trichocarpa} are two
species of forest tree that readily interbreed in nature, and early and
advanced generation hybrids have been described in hybrid zones located
where their ranges overlap (Geraldes et al., 2014; Suarez-Gonzalez et
al.,2016; 2018; Chhatre et al.~2019). It has previously been
hypothesized that hybridization between these two species contributes to
an adaptive process, facilitating introgression of genetic variation
related to locally-adaptive phenotypes from one species to the other
(Suarez-Gonzalez et al., 2016; Suarez-Gonzalez et al., 2018). However,
studies on controlled inter-specific crosses in \emph{Populus} have made
it clear that introgression is often biased toward particular regions of
the genome, particular \emph{Populus} species, or specific environments
(Lexer et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2010; Meirmans et al., 2017).
Therefore, the porosity of the genome to adaptive introgression between
hybridizing species may be constrained by incompatibilities between the
genomic variants involved as well as environmental context, two factors
which warrant further investigation. The environmental context of
adaptive introgression may be of particular importance in the case of
\emph{P. balsamifera} and \emph{P. trichocarpa}. \emph{P. balsamifera}
is more commonly found in colder, continental climates while \emph{P.
trichocarpa} is more often associated with milder, coastal climates with
longer growing seasons (Geraldes et al., 2014; Suarez-Gonzalez et al.,
2018). Considering hybrid zones between these species often fall along
the boundaries of their ranges (Chhatre et al., 2019; Fetter and Keller,
2023), it seems possible that adaptive introgression helps hybrid
individuals persist in environments that are outside of the optimum for
either parental species. Suarez-Gonzalez et al.~(2018) showed support
for this hypothesis, finding that introgressed regions in the genomes of
hybrids harbored signs of selection and variation associated with
adaptive traits, including phenology. However, the specific adaptive
variants within these genomic regions, and the nature of their effects
on fitness remain, for the most part, undiscovered. Identification of SV
involved in adaptive introgression between these two species would not
only contirbute to a broader undersatanidng of the molecular basis of
adaptive introgression, but would also provide helpful insight into the
conservation of these ecologically important species. In trees, long
generations times are thought to limit the potential contribution of de
novo mutation to adaptive evolution in response to rapid environmental
change (Feng et al., 2024; Savolainen et al., 2007). Therefore, adaptive
intorgression is viewed as one of the few routs for trees to undergo
rapid evolutionin repsonse top cliamte change (Feng et al., 2024). If
adaptive introgression does help admixed individiuals persist in
environments oitside of their optimum, then the varaition involved could
guide geneic conservation efforts, such as assisted gene flow.
Furthermore, industrial breeding of \emph{Populus} varietals generally
involves interspecific corsses, and breeding programs would benefit from
a clearer understanding of the genetic variation that is involved in
adaptive introgression between these two species.

Here, we take advantage of recent advances in pan-genome assembly
methods to produce a pan-genome reference, comprising 24 diverse
haplotypes from \emph{P. balsamifera}, \emph{P. trichocarpa} and their
hybrids, facilitating unbiased analysis of the sequence variation that
is segregating within natural \emph{Populus} hybrid zones. Using this
new pan-genome assembly, we genotype structural variation across 566
individuals sampled from within and outside of 6 distinct \emph{P.
balsamifera} and \emph{P. trichocarpa} hybrid zones. We assess the
extent of genomic diversity present in these species and their hybrids,
identifying genomic variation that is not present in the \emph{P.
trichocarpa} reference genome. Furthermore, we describe structural
variation involved both in introgression and in genomic divergence
between the two species. We shed light on the role that introgression
may play in shaping the pan-genome of these species, and the degree to
which tree genomes are porous to the inter-specific exchange of
structural variant alleles.

\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}

\subsubsection{Sample collection and whole genome
sequencing}\label{sample-collection-and-whole-genome-sequencing}

In January 2020, we collected dormant branch cuttings from 546 poplar
trees along 7 distinct latitudinal transects spanning natural contact
zones between Populus trichocarpa and Populus balsamifera
Figure~\ref{fig-1}. Short read whole genome sequencing and subsequent
bioinformatic analyses were performed as described in Bolte et
al.~(2024). Briefly, Genomic DNA libraries for all sampled individuals
were constructed at the Duke University Center for Genomic and
Computational Biology and sequenced using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000
instrument with an S4 flow cell with 64 samples per lane (Illumina Inc.,
San Diego, USA). De-indexing, QC, trimming adapter sequences, and
sequence pre-processing were completed by the sequencing facility. In
addition to short read sequencing, we also sequenced a subset of 40
sampled individuals with PacBio HiFi long reads. We harvested tissue
from newly-expanded leaves grown under low light conditions to use for
high molecular weight DNA extraction. After confirming extraction
quality through gel electrophoresis and bioanalysis, we submitted HMW
DNA to the University of Maryland Center for Integrative Biosciences
Genomics Core Facility for library preparation and sequencing on the the
PacBio Sequel system with two samples per SMRT flow cell. We sequenced
one \emph{P. balsamifera} sample (939) for an additional run on a full
SMRT cell. We also sequenced this individual with Oxford Nanopore
Technology (ONT) platform. We submitted high molecular weight DNA to the
Vermont Integrative Genomics Resource Sequencing Center for library
preparation and sequencing on XXX flowcell (two runs) and XXX flowcell
(one run)

\subsubsection{Genome assembly}\label{genome-assembly}

Of the 40 individuals sequenced with HiFi long reads, we selected 16 for
whole genome assembly Figure~\ref{fig-1}. These samples ranged from 20
to 35x long read coverage. We performed de-novo genome assembly of the
HiFi reads for these samples with HiCanu (Nurk et al., 2020). We set
HiCanu parameters as follows: gSize=``400m'', lc=``5'', lcer=``0.055'',
ovrlp=``350'', mincov=``9''. To detect potential contaminants in the raw
assemblies produced by HiCanu, we used the program Kraken2 to compare
the k-mer content of assembled contigs to the ``PlusPFP'' database of
known taxon-specific k-mers representing archaea, bacteria, viral,
human, protozoa, fungi and plant taxa (Lu et al., 2022). We then used a
custom bioawk script to remove any assembled contig that Kraken2
assigned to a taxonomic unit other than \emph{Populus}, leaving only
unassigned or \emph{Populus}- assigned contigs in each assembly. We
assessed the accuracy and completeness of the decontaminated assemblies
using QUAST and BUSCO (Gurevich et al., 2013; Simão et al., 2015). To
further assess the contiguity and quality of these assemblies, we used
minimap2 and BWA to map the original HiFi reads and additional Illumina
short reads back to each assembled haplotype (H. Li, 2018; H. Li \&
Durbin, 2010). We passed these alignments to the program CRAQ (K. Li et
al., 2023), which leverages read depth along assembled contigs for
quality assessment. We repeated these quality assessment checks at each
subsequent stage of genome assembly. Phasing, or the separation and
concatenation of contigs belonging to the same parental haplotype is a
key step in genome assembly for hybrid individuals, as divergent
haplotypes likely contain important genetic information. We used
mininmap2 to map reads back to assembled contigs and to map assembled
contigs to themselves. We then used the purge haplotigs pipeline (Roach
et al., 2018) to split diploid assemblies into two assembled haploytpes
for each individual. We used RagTag (Alonge et al.~2022) to connect
decontaminated, phased contigs into pseudo-chromosomal scaffolds, guided
by alignments of assembled contigs to the Nisqually1 \emph{P.
trichocarpa} reference genome. We visually inspected minimap2 alignments
of scaffolded assemblies to the reference genome to identify potential
scaffolding errors. We used RepeatMasker to annotate and mask repetitive
regions and annotated possible coding domains and predicted protein
sequences for each assembly with AUGUSTUS (Smit et al., 2015; Hoff et
al., 2019).

\subsubsection{Pan-genome assembly}\label{pan-genome-assembly}

In a pan-genome graph, a non-redundant collection of all input sequences
is represented as ``nodes'', while the linear sequence of each input
genome is stored as a ``path'' connecting a series of nodes. In this
approach to graph construction, each node of the graph w describes the
alignment between at least two sequences, given an expected level of
sequence divergence. We constructed a pan-genome graph from an all-by
all alignment of the 24 assembled haplotypes. Any contigs shorter than
100kb were dropped before alignment. We used wfmash (Guarracino et al.,
2021) to perform all-by-all alignments between assembled chromosomes,
and seqwish (Garrison and Guarracino, 2022) to project alignments into a
graph pan-genome assembly. Pan-genome graphs constructed this way can
have highly complex topography, which may hinder downstream applications
such a sequence alignment. To combat this issue, we used the program
smoothXG to smooth complex variation in these graphs. We also assembled
a separate graph specifically for subsequent alignment-based analyses
using the minigraph-cactus pipeline (Hickey et al., 2023). We used the
program panacus to asses pan-genome growth and coverage statistics
(Parmigiani et al., 2024). We used the program ODGI (Guarracino et al.,
2022) to perform basic graph quality control and to partition the core (
sequence present in all individuals), shell (sequence variably present
or absent across individuals) and singleton sequence (present in only
one individuals) content for each graph and individual represented in
the graphs. We used the program vg (Garrison et al., 2018) to
deconstruct each graph assembly into a VCF containing the variation
encapsulated in each graph. We passed this deconstructed VCF file to
vcfbub (github.com/pangenome/vcfbub) to collapse nested SV sites into
the top-level variant for all SV less than 10kb in length. Using
bcftools (Danecek et al., 2021) we split biallelic sites into
multiallelic records for this deconstructed vcf.

\subsubsection{Genotyping Pan-genomic
Variation}\label{genotyping-pan-genomic-variation}

We aligned sequencing reads from additional samples to pan-genome graph
assembly to genotype SNPs and SVs. We aligned PacBio HiFi reads for 40
total individuals (including the 16 used to construct the pan-genome
graph) to the minigraph-cactus graph using the program GraphAligner
(Rautiainen \& Marschall, 2020). To characterize sequence variation
across a broader set of individuals, we also mapped Illumina short reads
for 575 individuals to the pan-genome graph using the program giraffe
(Sirén et al., 2021). We then called SV and SNPs from these alignments
using the vg call algorithm (Garrison et al., 2018). We used bcftools to
split multialleleic calls into separate records, normalize alleles
against the \emph{P. trichocarpa} reference and merge calls for all
samples into one VCF representing SV and SNP genotypes in the \emph{P.
trichocarpa} reference coordinate space.

\subsubsection{Analysis of Structural Variation and
Introgression}\label{analysis-of-structural-variation-and-introgression}

We used ADMIXTURE results from Bolte et al (2024) to assign each
individual an admixture proportion at K=2 and K=4. The genetic data used
for this ADMIXTURE analysis came from SNP calls from mappings of the
same illlumina reads used in this study, however they were mapped to the
\emph{P. trichocarpa} reference genome. We used this same genetic data
set to perform local ancestry inference (LAI) using LOTR (Dias-Alves et
al., 2018). These ADMIXTURE and LAI data sets were used to visualize and
analyze patterns of local and global genomic ancestry throughout this
study.

We used ODGI to flatten the Nisqually1 \emph{P. trichocarpa} reference
genome path in the cactus graph. We then used a bed file representation
of this path and reference gene annotations to genotype PAV of reference
sequence across all paths of the cactus graph. We used R version 4.1.0
to identify core and shell gene sequences from this data and to perform
PCA on the PAV genotypes (R Core Team, 2024). We also ran a similar PAV
PCA with the merged vcf representing all 575 sequenced samples in this
study, using plink2 (Chang et al., 2015). We used the
-\/--allele-weights flag to extract the loading of each allele for each
SV on the first 3 principal components.

To find SV potentially involved in introgression, we employed custom
scripts to identify ancestry blocks along the chromosomes of all 335
admixed individuals in this study. An individual was considered admixed
if its k=2 ADMIXTURE score indicated at least 5 percent admixture
genome-wide. We used Bedtools (Quinlan \& Hall, 2010) to find SV that
overlapped ancestry blocks in each admixed individual. We then scored
each SV allele based on its prevalence in ancestry blocks that
contrasted the average global ancestry of an individual.

For all SV that were outliers in principal component or LAI analyses, we
used Bedtools to check for overlap with annotated genes. We then used
plantgenie to analyze PFAM enrichment of gene sets (Sundell et al.,
2015).

\subsection{Results}\label{results}

\subsubsection{Whole genome sequencing and
assembly.}\label{whole-genome-sequencing-and-assembly.}

Illumina sequencing yielded on average of 8358 MB of sequence,
corresponding to an average sequencing depth of 21x. PacBio HiFi
sequencing yielded on average 6368 MB of sequence, corresponding to an
average sequencing depth of 16x. Sample 939 was sequenced to a depth of
roughly 60X HiFi and roughly 20X ONT reads. Table 1 shows summary
statistics for the 16 whole genome assemblies included in the
pan-genome. Assembly quality and contiguity were generally high, however
alternate haplotypes were not always fully assembled (Table 1).

\subsubsection{Pan-genome assembly}\label{pan-genome-assembly-1}

The minigraph-cactus pangenome graph contained a total of 102,907,131
nodes comprising 1.2 Gbp of sequence. Of this, 243 Mbp was present
across all individuals (core genome), while 423Mbp was present in some
but not all individuals (shell genome). The remaining 537 Mbp
represented singleton sequence. Figure~\ref{fig-2} shows how the size of
the sequence classes changes as individuals are added to the pan-genome.
Figure~\ref{fig-3} shows the proportions of core, shell and singleton
sequence within each sample. \textbf{?@fig-4} shows each genome in the
pan-genome graph plotted on the first two principal components of a PCA
on PAV of reference sequence.

\subsubsection{Pan-genomic Variation}\label{pan-genomic-variation}

3708 annotated genes were variably present or absent across the 17
genomes used to construct the pan- =genome. These genes were
significantly enriched for various protein families including NB-ARC
domain, D-mannose binding lectin, sulfotransferases, cupins, and
Cytochrome P450. Of these shell genes, 167 were present in all of the
pure \emph{P. trichocarpa} individuals and none of the pure \emph{P.
balsamifera} samples making up the pan-genome graph. These \emph{P.
trichocarpa} - specific genes were enriched for protein families,
including sulfotransferases, serine carboxypeptidases, Mlo family
proteins, D-mannose binding lectin, Glycosyl hydrolases and absistic
acid (ABA) induced proteins.

The cactus pan-genome graph contained 1,773,427 SV greater than 20bp in
length. Figure~\ref{fig-5} shows the distribution of these variants
across the genome. The distribution of frequencies of the non-reference
allele for these SV is shown in Figure~\ref{fig-6}.

The first two principal components of a PCA on PAV genotyped from short
read alignments to the pan-genome graph are shown in Figure~\ref{fig-7}.
The loading of each allele for each SV on the first principal component
of a PCA on PAV genotyped from short read alignments to the pan-genome
graph is shown in \textbf{?@fig-8}. The SV that were outliers on PC1
overlapped 1362 annotated genes. These genes were significantly enriched
for protein families involved in development and growth (K-Box proteins,
KNOX proteins), cold tolerance (DEAD/DEAH box helicases), and phenology
(SRF transcription factors).

\subsubsection{SV and Introgression}\label{sv-and-introgression}

We identified 126,973 SV that overlapped ancestry blocks in admixed
individuals, and found that 30,721 of these were associated with blocks
of either \emph{P. trichocarpa} or \emph{P. balsamifera} ancestry in
admixed individuals.

\subsubsection{Tables}\label{tables}

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/table.jpg}}\{fig-format:
svg\}

\section{Figures}\label{figures}

\begin{figure}

\begin{minipage}{0.50\linewidth}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/msamp.jpg}}

}

\subcaption{\label{fig-1a}}

\end{minipage}%
%
\begin{minipage}{0.50\linewidth}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/msamp_sub.jpg}}

}

\subcaption{\label{fig-1b}}

\end{minipage}%

\caption{\label{fig-1}(a): sampling locations for 575 individuals used
in this study, color indicates ancestry based in ADMIXTURE analysis (b):
A subset of 16 individuals used for whole genome assembly}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}

\begin{minipage}{0.50\linewidth}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/pg_growth.jpg}}

}

\subcaption{\label{fig-2a}}

\end{minipage}%
%
\begin{minipage}{0.50\linewidth}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/pg_content.jpg}}

}

\subcaption{\label{fig-2b}}

\end{minipage}%

\caption{\label{fig-2}(a): Pan-genome growth curve visualizes the change
in core and shell genome size as samples are added. (b): The relative
length of the core, shell and singleton portions of the pan-genome for
each sample represented}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}

\begin{minipage}{0.33\linewidth}
\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/com_pav_pca.jpg}}
\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/rar_pav_pca.jpg}}\end{minipage}%
%
\begin{minipage}{0.33\linewidth}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/pav_pca.jpg}}

}

\subcaption{\label{fig-3c}}

\end{minipage}%

\caption{\label{fig-3}The first two principal components of a PCA on
presence/absence variation in the pan-genome. Results of PCA on common
(a), rare (b) and all (c) PAV are shown Color indicates ancestry based
in ADMIXTURE analysis.}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/sv_genomic_distribution.jpg}}

}

\caption{\label{fig-5}The density of SV larger than 20bp in length
across the genome (purple) compared to the density of annotated genes
(green)}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/sv_freq.jpg}}

}

\caption{\label{fig-6}The frequency distribution of the minor allele for
SV of different size classes}

\end{figure}%

\begin{figure}

\centering{

\pandocbounded{\includegraphics[keepaspectratio]{figs/sv_pc1_pc2.jpg}}

}

\caption{\label{fig-7}The first two principal components of a PCA of PAV
genotyped from short read alignments to the pan-genome graph. Color
indicates ancestry based on ADMIXTURE analysis. Shape indicates which of
the latitudinal transects the individual was sampled from.}

\end{figure}%

\subsection*{References}\label{references}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{References}

\phantomsection\label{refs}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\vspace{1em}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-almarri2020population}
Almarri, M. A., Bergström, A., Prado-Martinez, J., Yang, F., Fu, B.,
Dunham, A. S., et al. (2020). Population structure, stratification, and
introgression of human structural variation. \emph{Cell}, \emph{182}(1),
189--199.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-bock2023genomics}
Bock, D. G., Cai, Z., Elphinstone, C., Gonzalez-Segovia, E.,
Hirabayashi, K., Huang, K., et al. (2023). Genomics of plant speciation.
\emph{Plant Communications}, \emph{4}(5).

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-chang2015second}
Chang, C. C., Chow, C. C., Tellier, L. C., Vattikuti, S., Purcell, S.
M., \& Lee, J. J. (2015). Second-generation PLINK: Rising to the
challenge of larger and richer datasets. \emph{Gigascience},
\emph{4}(1), s13742--015.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-cheng2019frequent}
Cheng, H., Liu, J., Wen, J., Nie, X., Xu, L., Chen, N., et al. (2019).
Frequent intra-and inter-species introgression shapes the landscape of
genetic variation in bread wheat. \emph{Genome Biology}, \emph{20},
1--16.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-danecek2021}
Danecek, P., Bonfield, J. K., Liddle, J., Marshall, J., Ohan, V.,
Pollard, M. O., et al. (2021). Twelve years of SAMtools and BCFtools.
\emph{GigaScience}, \emph{10}(2).
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/giab008}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-dias2018loter}
Dias-Alves, T., Mairal, J., \& Blum, M. G. (2018). Loter: A software
package to infer local ancestry for a wide range of species.
\emph{Molecular Biology and Evolution}, \emph{35}(9), 2318--2326.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-fang2024fitness}
Fang, B., \& Edwards, S. V. (2024). Fitness consequences of structural
variation inferred from a house finch pangenome. \emph{Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences}, \emph{121}(47), e2409943121.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-feng2024integrating}
Feng, J., Dan, X., Cui, Y., Gong, Y., Peng, M., Sang, Y., et al. (2024).
Integrating evolutionary genomics of forest trees to inform future tree
breeding amid rapid climate change. \emph{Plant Communications},
\emph{5}(10).

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-gao2019tomato}
Gao, L., Gonda, I., Sun, H., Ma, Q., Bao, K., Tieman, D. M., et al.
(2019). The tomato pan-genome uncovers new genes and a rare allele
regulating fruit flavor. \emph{Nature Genetics}, \emph{51}(6),
1044--1051.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-garrison2018}
Garrison, E., Sirén, J., Novak, A. M., Hickey, G., Eizenga, J. M.,
Dawson, E. T., et al. (2018). Variation graph toolkit improves read
mapping by representing genetic variation in the reference. \emph{Nature
Biotechnology}, \emph{36}(9), 875--879.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4227}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-gurevich2013quast}
Gurevich, A., Saveliev, V., Vyahhi, N., \& Tesler, G. (2013). QUAST:
Quality assessment tool for genome assemblies. \emph{Bioinformatics},
\emph{29}(8), 1072--1075.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-hamala2021genomic}
Hämälä, T., Wafula, E. K., Guiltinan, M. J., Ralph, P. E., Depamphilis,
C. W., \& Tiffin, P. (2021). Genomic structural variants constrain and
facilitate adaptation in natural populations of theobroma cacao, the
chocolate tree. \emph{Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences},
\emph{118}(35), e2102914118.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-hamilton2016adaptive}
Hamilton, J. A., \& Miller, J. M. (2016). Adaptive introgression as a
resource for management and genetic conservation in a changing climate.
\emph{Conservation Biology}, \emph{30}(1), 33--41.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-hickey2023}
Hickey, G., Monlong, J., Ebler, J., Novak, A. M., Eizenga, J. M., Gao,
Y., et al. (2023). Pangenome graph construction from genome alignments
with Minigraph-Cactus. \emph{Nature Biotechnology}, \emph{42}(4),
663--673. \url{https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01793-w}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-kang2023pan}
Kang, M., Wu, H., Liu, H., Liu, W., Zhu, M., Han, Y., et al. (2023). The
pan-genome and local adaptation of arabidopsis thaliana. \emph{Nature
Communications}, \emph{14}(1), 6259.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-kou2020evolutionary}
Kou, Y., Liao, Y., Toivainen, T., Lv, Y., Tian, X., Emerson, J., et al.
(2020). Evolutionary genomics of structural variation in asian rice
(oryza sativa) domestication. \emph{Molecular Biology and Evolution},
\emph{37}(12), 3507--3524.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-leroy2020adaptive}
Leroy, T., Louvet, J.-M., Lalanne, C., Le Provost, G., Labadie, K.,
Aury, J.-M., et al. (2020). Adaptive introgression as a driver of local
adaptation to climate in european white oaks. \emph{New Phytologist},
\emph{226}(4), 1171--1182.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-li2018minimap2}
Li, H. (2018). Minimap2: Pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences.
\emph{Bioinformatics}, \emph{34}(18), 3094--3100.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-li2010fast}
Li, H., \& Durbin, R. (2010). Fast and accurate long-read alignment with
burrows--wheeler transform. \emph{Bioinformatics}, \emph{26}(5),
589--595.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-li2023identification}
Li, K., Xu, P., Wang, J., Yi, X., \& Jiao, Y. (2023). Identification of
errors in draft genome assemblies at single-nucleotide resolution for
quality assessment and improvement. \emph{Nature Communications},
\emph{14}(1), 6556.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-li2024pan}
Li, Y., Yao, J., Sang, H., Wang, Q., Su, L., Zhao, X., et al. (2024).
Pan-genome analysis highlights the role of structural variation in the
evolution and environmental adaptation of asian honeybees.
\emph{Molecular Ecology Resources}, \emph{24}(2), e13905.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-li2023pig}
Li, Z., Liu, X., Wang, C., Li, Z., Jiang, B., Zhang, R., et al. (2023).
The pig pangenome provides insights into the roles of coding structural
variations in genetic diversity and adaptation. \emph{Genome Research},
\emph{33}(10), 1833--1847.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-liang2025}
Liang, Y.-Y., Liu, H., Lin, Q.-Q., Shi, Y., Zhou, B.-F., Wang, J.-S., et
al. (2025). Pan-genome analysis reveals local adaptation to climate
driven by introgression in oak species. \emph{Molecular Biology and
Evolution}, \emph{42}(5), msaf088.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msaf088}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-lu2022}
Lu, J., Rincon, N., Wood, D. E., Breitwieser, F. P., Pockrandt, C.,
Langmead, B., et al. (2022). Metagenome analysis using the Kraken
software suite. \emph{Nature Protocols}, \emph{17}(12), 2815--2839.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-022-00738-y}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-nurk2020hicanu}
Nurk, S., Walenz, B. P., Rhie, A., Vollger, M. R., Logsdon, G. A.,
Grothe, R., et al. (2020). HiCanu: Accurate assembly of segmental
duplications, satellites, and allelic variants from high-fidelity long
reads. \emph{Genome Research}, \emph{30}(9), 1291--1305.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-parmigiani2024}
Parmigiani, L., Garrison, E., Stoye, J., Marschall, T., \& Doerr, D.
(2024). Panacus: fast and exact pangenome growth and core size
estimation. \emph{Bioinformatics}.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae720}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-quinlan2010bedtools}
Quinlan, A. R., \& Hall, I. M. (2010). BEDTools: A flexible suite of
utilities for comparing genomic features. \emph{Bioinformatics},
\emph{26}(6), 841--842.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-R}
R Core Team. (2024). \emph{R: A language and environment for statistical
computing}. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Retrieved from \url{https://www.R-project.org/}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-rautiainen2020}
Rautiainen, M., \& Marschall, T. (2020). GraphAligner: rapid and
versatile sequence-to-graph alignment. \emph{Genome Biology},
\emph{21}(1). \url{https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02157-2}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-rendon2021adaptive}
Rendón-Anaya, M., Wilson, J., Sveinsson, S., Fedorkov, A., Cottrell, J.,
Bailey, M. E., et al. (2021). Adaptive introgression facilitates
adaptation to high latitudes in european aspen (populus tremula l.).
\emph{Molecular Biology and Evolution}, \emph{38}(11), 5034--5050.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-savolainen2007gene}
Savolainen, O., Pyhäjärvi, T., \& Knürr, T. (2007). Gene flow and local
adaptation in trees. \emph{Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst.}, \emph{38}(1),
595--619.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-secomandi2025pangenome}
Secomandi, S., Gallo, G. R., Rossi, R., Rodrı́guez Fernandes, C., Jarvis,
E. D., Bonisoli-Alquati, A., et al. (2025). Pangenome graphs and their
applications in biodiversity genomics. \emph{Nature Genetics}, 1--14.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-simao2015busco}
Simão, F. A., Waterhouse, R. M., Ioannidis, P., Kriventseva, E. V., \&
Zdobnov, E. M. (2015). BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and annotation
completeness with single-copy orthologs. \emph{Bioinformatics},
\emph{31}(19), 3210--3212.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-siruxe9n2021}
Sirén, J., Monlong, J., Chang, X., Novak, A. M., Eizenga, J. M.,
Markello, C., et al. (2021). Pangenomics enables genotyping of known
structural variants in 5202 diverse genomes. \emph{Science},
\emph{374}(6574). \url{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg8871}

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-songsomboon2021genomic}
Songsomboon, K., Brenton, Z., Heuser, J., Kresovich, S., Shakoor, N.,
Mockler, T., \& Cooper, E. A. (2021). Genomic patterns of structural
variation among diverse genotypes of sorghum bicolor and a potential
role for deletions in local adaptation. \emph{G3}, \emph{11}(7),
jkab154.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-suarez2018adaptive}
Suarez-Gonzalez, A., Lexer, C., \& Cronk, Q. C. (2018). Adaptive
introgression: A plant perspective. \emph{Biology Letters},
\emph{14}(3), 20170688.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-sundell2015plant}
Sundell, D., Mannapperuma, C., Netotea, S., Delhomme, N., Lin, Y.-C.,
Sjodin, A., et al. (2015). The plant genome integrative explorer
resource: PlantGenIE. org.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-xia2023structural}
Xia, X., Zhang, F., Li, S., Luo, X., Peng, L., Dong, Z., et al. (2023).
Structural variation and introgression from wild populations in east
asian cattle genomes confer adaptation to local environment.
\emph{Genome Biology}, \emph{24}(1), 211.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-zhang2021important}
Zhang, L., Reifová, R., Halenková, Z., \& Gompert, Z. (2021). How
important are structural variants for speciation? \emph{Genes},
\emph{12}(7), 1084.

\bibitem[\citeproctext]{ref-zhang2021pan}
Zhang, X., Liu, T., Wang, J., Wang, P., Qiu, Y., Zhao, W., et al.
(2021). Pan-genome of raphanus highlights genetic variation and
introgression among domesticated, wild, and weedy radishes.
\emph{Molecular Plant}, \emph{14}(12), 2032--2055.

\end{CSLReferences}




\end{document}
